TCS
1 . Brief about CI/CD pipeline stages which are using in your project?
2. Terraform lifecycle parameters?
A. In Terraform, lifecycle is a meta-argument inside a resource block that modifies how Terraform handles resource creation, replacement, and destruction. 
   It includes create_before_destroy for zero downtime, prevent_destroy for protecting critical resources, ignore_changes to prevent drift from external updates, 
   and replace_triggered_by to force recreation when dependencies change.

   depends_on controls dependency order, while lifecycle controls resource behavior during create, update, or destroy operations.
   
3. Terraform about ignore-change param?
A. ignore_changes is a lifecycle meta-argument in Terraform that instructs Terraform to ignore updates to specified resource attributes during plan and apply,
   typically used when external systems modify those attributes.

4. How to upgrade AKS cluster?
   Check Current Version:
   az aks show --resource-group <rg-name> --name <cluster-name> --query kubernetesVersion
   Check Available Upgrade Versions:
   az aks get-upgrades --resource-group <rg-name> --name <cluster-name> --output table
   Upgrade Control Plane + Node Pools (Standard Way):
   az aks upgrade \
  --resource-group <rg-name> \
  --name <cluster-name> \
  --kubernetes-version <target-version>
This upgrades:

Control plane

All node pools (if not specified separately)

You will be prompted to confirm.
Upgrade Node Pool Separately (Recommended in Production)

First upgrade control plane only:
   az aks upgrade \
  --resource-group <rg-name> \
  --name <cluster-name> \
  --kubernetes-version <target-version> \
  --control-plane-only
   Then upgrade node pool:
   az aks nodepool upgrade \
  --resource-group <rg-name> \
  --cluster-name <cluster-name> \
  --name <nodepool-name> \
  --kubernetes-version <target-version>
Verify Upgrade:
Verify Upgrade

5. what is kubectl command for to see node size?
   kubectl get nodes
   kubectl top nodes
   Example output:
   NAME        CPU(cores)   CPU%   MEMORY(bytes)   MEMORY%
   node-1      250m         6%     1024Mi          20%

   To check node size in Kubernetes, I use kubectl describe node to see CPU and memory capacity and allocatable resources. 
   For real-time usage, I use kubectl top nodes. In cloud environments like EKS or GKE, I also verify the instance 
   type via node labels or the cloud provider console

6. what is configmap?
7. what is purpose of APIM and application loader balance, if apim exposing api endpoints, is it work with application loader balancer also or not?
8. tell us about your self?
9. which terraform version you are using?
10. through pipeline to connect with azure key vault what should be there?
11. is service connection restrict the user to access pipelines?


Tell me serverless function in azure?
how to integrate sonar with jenkins?
what is microservices architecture?
how you find or see if pipeline fail?
if you have frentend and backed api and db how you will deploy them in cluster?


write cicd pipeline code in azuredevops sample piece for building?
what is terraform drift?
what is terraform export?
how to recover terraform statefile in locall?
how to release terraform lock?
what is backend in terraform?
what is process you are doing in production deployments
write a shell script how shellscript determine json file and how to add data in json file and how to read?
what is configmap and secrets?
how to store credentials in pipeline code or keyvault how do you integrede?
what are instructions you are using in docker file?
how do you run docker image?
what is argument and cmd in docker?


how to write and read dynamic parameter in azure cicd pipeline code?
parameters:
- name: environment
  type: string
  default: dev
  values:
  - dev
  - test
  - prod

parameters:
- name: environment
  type: string
  default: dev
steps:
- script: echo "Environment is ${{ parameters.environment }}"
variables:
  env: dev
steps:
- script: echo "Environment is $(env)"

what and all we can store in azure key valuts?
which type of agents we can use for cicd azure  pipeline?
service endpoint and private endpoint in azure?
A Service Endpoint allows a VNet to access an Azure service over its public endpoint securely.
A Private Endpoint assigns a private IP to the service inside your VNet, removing public access completely
Service Endpoint = secure public road
Private Endpoint = bring the service inside your network

how to connect valut from cicd pipeline code?

what is compute gallary in azure?
Azure Compute Gallery is a central repository for VM images. It allows versioning, replication across regions, 
and sharing, making it easier to deploy consistent and scalable virtual machines in Azure

In my last project, we created a base VM image with all company software installed. We stored it in Azure Compute Gallery, 
then used it to deploy 100+ VMs across 3 regions with the same configuration. This saved a lot of time and ensured consistency

how to login azure cli,  what is the command?
when we create service connection what componebt we get?
what are system and user nodes?
taint and tolarence?
how to schedule pods in kubernetes cluster?
how to schedule pod in specific node?
what are the ways to deploy pods?

Affinity/anti-affinity?
“Affinity and Anti-Affinity in Kubernetes are used to control how pods are scheduled relative to other pods.
Pod Affinity means I want my pod to be scheduled close to certain other pods.
For example, if two services communicate frequently, I can place them on the same node or same zone to reduce latency.
Pod Anti-Affinity is the opposite—I want to avoid placing pods together.
This is mainly used for high availability. For example, I don’t want multiple replicas of the same application running on the same node, so if one node fails, all replicas won’t go down.
Both support two types of rules:
requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution → hard rule (must follow)
preferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution → soft rule (try but not guaranteed)
They also use labels and selectors to identify which pods to match.”

nodeselector and nodeaffinity?
 “nodeSelector and Node Affinity are both used to control which nodes a pod gets scheduled on.
nodeSelector is the simpler approach—it allows you to match pods to nodes using exact key-value labels. For example, if I specify disktype=ssd, the pod will only be scheduled on nodes with that label. But it only supports exact matching and AND logic.
Node Affinity is a more advanced and flexible version. It supports operators like In, NotIn, Exists, and also allows us to define both hard and soft rules using requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution and preferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution.
One key difference is that Node Affinity supports complex logic like OR conditions and preferences, which nodeSelector cannot do.
Internally, Kubernetes actually converts nodeSelector into Node Affinity, so you can think of nodeSelector as a simplified version of required Node Affinity.
In real projects, I usually prefer Node Affinity because it’s more flexible and scalable, especially when we have multiple node groups or need preference-based scheduling.”

Taints/tolerations?
Taints are applied on nodes to restrict pods from being scheduled, and tolerations are added to pods to allow them to
run on those tainted nodes. By default, pods cannot go to tainted nodes unless they have matching tolerations.
