SSH
---
SSH stands for Secure Shell, it is an protocol that can be used for accessing the shell of a remote linux machine securely over the network.

Why do we need to remote access to a Machine?
If there are large network of computers within an organization, managing them by reaching physical each machine is going to take lot of time, instead if we can gain remote access to machine, it saves lot of time interms logistics in managing the machine.

Through SSH we can gain the access to the Shell of an remote linux machine, so that we can perform various different operations like software package installations/upgradations, applying patches and performing maintainance activities like backup/restore etc. 

There is an another methodology in connecting to the remote computer, which is telnet. Telnet is not secured and the communication or data exchange between client/host computer will takes place in plain text value so that any intruder can read the information being exchanged between the parties, so it is not secured.

Alternate to Telnet has been introduced which is SSH. SSH ensures the communication or data exchange between the host/client are secured completely through encryption technic.
  
Encryption is a technic through which we transform the original data into another format, so that anyone during receives/sees the data cannot understand the data. only the intended receiver only can decrypt the data and read the original information, so that data is high secured.
  
Encryption works based on encryption key, there are lot of key generation algorithms are there like RSA, SHA, blowfish, DSA, AES etc through which we can generate an encryption key using which we can encrypt the data and exchange it securely

The process of converting the data into another format which other people cannot understand is called "Cryptograpic" technic. Encryption is one of the cryptographic technic for securing the data.
  
SSH uses cryptographic technics to secure the data. SSH uses 3 types of encryption technics for securing the data over the communication
1. symmetric encryption
2. asymmetric encryption
3. hashing

SSH
Secure Shell, it is a protocol or communication technic through which we can access the shell of the remote computer securely. Through SSH we can manage a remote computer and perform operations by issuing shell commands like Software Package Installations/Upgradation, patching, backup and restore etc.
  
SSH uses cryptographic technics for securing the end-end communication. It uses 3 types of encryption technics
1. Symmetric Encryption
2. Asymmetic Encryption
3. Hashing

What is Encryption?
Encryption is a technic where we use encryption key for transforming the data into another form, so that no other people can understand the data. The person who poses the encryption key can decrypt the message and build it back and can read it. 
  
1. Symmetric Encryption
A single key is used for both encrypting and decrypting the data. here the key should be kept private unless otherwise the data security cannot be achieved. In order to exchange the key between both the parties there are several key exchanges technics are there

2. Asymmetric Encryption
In an Asymmetric Encryption we have 2 keys. private key and another one is public key. These keys are generated through mathematical calculation in such a way one cannot be computed through other. The data encrypted through public key can be only decryptable by its corresponding private key only.
These 2 keys are used for exchanging the symmetric key between parties not for data exchange.
  
3. Hashing
Hashing is used for data integrity check, where the receiver can always verify the data he has recieved is the original one that is send by the sender or not by verifying the hash generated on recieved data with the original one.


Configuring SSH Access
-----------------------
Remote Server = The Machine we want to access remotely

1. Install SSH Server
There is an open source ssh server software available for Linux distributions with package name: openssh-server, we can install on the remote machine
sudo apt update 
sudo apt install -y openssh-server


2. Upon installing the openssh server, it creates a file called sshd_config under /etc/ssh/sshd_config. This file contains SSH Server configuration settings which can modified if required for changing the behaviour of the Server
Few configuration settings are as below:

2.1 Enabling SSH Access to the remote computer means allowing the client to connect to the remote machine onbehalf of one of the user of the machine.
Generate public and private key and associate the public key to one of the user of the remote computer, indicating the clients can ssh into the remote computer as this user.
  
If we want to enable remote access of the machine for bob, we need to generate public/private key copy public key contents into the below File.
~/.ssh/authorized_keys
Now SSH Server will verify the public key produced by the client at the time of connecting with authorized_keys file to verify is this user is allowed to connect or not

The default location of the authorized key file is ~/.ssh/authorized_keys, if we want to change the filename of location we need to and modify the property in sshd_config file

sshd_config
AuthorizedKeysFile ~/.ssh/authorized_keys

2.2 by default the SSH Server inorder to allow client to access the remote server will prompts for username/password of the user since we are using public/private key authentication we can disable password authentication which can be done by modifying property in sshd_config

PasswordAuthentication no


#3 Generate public and private key pair
There are 2 ways we can generate public and private key
1. we can use puttygen tool to generate public and private key
select the algorithm as RSA and generate keypair, if we want we can enable key phrase to protect the key not to be used by others.
  
2. This is the most preffered way of generate the public/private keys while working on linux computers.
In windows if we have powershell/git bash then also we can use this technic
There is a tool called ssh-keygen upon running will generate public/private key under the default location
$USER/.ssh with default filenames as id_rsa.pub and id_rsa.ppk


Generate the public/private key on the workstation/client computer and then copy the public key onto the server.
  
#4
Now copy the public key onto the SSH server into authorized_keys file for the user whom you want to enable ssh access.
There are 2 ways to copy the public key file on to the remote server


1. use scp command to copy the file onto the remote system and then copy the contents of the file and manually and paste it into authorized_keys

scp publickeypath username@ipaddress:/location

2. we can use ssh-copy-id command directly, which takes care of copying the public key onto the authorized_keys file by prompting username/password of the remote user machine 

#5 How to ssh into the remote machine
SSH is the client utility available on linux distro by default. and if we are using windows 10 then the utility is available
we can install powershell or gitbash to make the utility available in windows as well.
  
if the workstation is linux machine|powershell|gitbash then directly ssh into remote computer using ssh command
ssh username@ipaddress = ssh client command by default looks for ssh public key/private key under userhome .ssh/ directory with key names as id_rsa.pub and id_rsa.ppk
~/.ssh
  |-id_rsa.pub
  |-id_rsa.ppk
  
to make these keys secured we need to enable file permissions as 600
  
in windows we need to place the ssh keys at the client computer only under $USER/.ssh directory, because a $USER cannot be accessed by other users of the windows machine

if the ssh key locations are different or key filenames are different the ssh will fail to let the ssh client pick the keys from different location or filename use the below command.
ssh -i location/publickey username@ipaddress
  
If we dont have ssh client program available on windows computer then we can use putty tool to ssh onto the remote computer.
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
